 
 
 
 
Face Recognition Using Machine Learning 
 
A Term Paper Report Submitted in Partial Fulfillment for the Award of the 
Degree 
BACHELOR OF TECHNOLOGY 
IN 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
Submitted 
By 
Naram Bharat Kumar 
(21341A1285) 
Under the Esteemed Guidance of 
Mr. M. Hari Krishna 
Assistant Professor 
November 2023 
DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
GMR INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY 
An Autonomous institute, affiliated to JNTU-GV, VIZIANAGARAM 
(Accredited by NBA, NAAC with ‘A’ Grade & ISO 9001:2015 Certified Institution) 
G.M.R. Nagar, Rajam-532127, A.P 
2023-2024 

I | P a g e 
 
 
GMR INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY 
An Autonomous institute, affiliated to JNTU-GV, VIZIANAGRAM 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
CERTIFICATE 
 
This is to certify that the term paper report titled “Face Recognition Using 
Machine Learning” submitted by Naram Bharat Kumar bearing 21341A1285 
has been carried out in partial fulfillment for the award of B. Tech. degree in IT 
to JNTU-GV is a record of bonafide work carried out under our guidance and 
supervision. The report embodied in this paper has not been submitted to any 
other universities or institutions for the award of any degree or diploma. 
 
 
 
 
 
Signature of the Supervisor 
Signature of the H.O.D 
 
Mr. M. Hari Krishna, 
Dr. V. Vasudha Rani 
Asst. Professor, 
Associate Professor & HOD 
Department of IT, 
Department of IT 
GMRIT, Rajam. 
GMRIT, Rajam. 

II | P a g e 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
 
 
It gives me immense pleasure to express a deep sense of gratitude 
to my guide, Mr. M. Hari Krishna, Assistant Professor, Department of 
Information Technology, for wholehearted and invaluable guidance throughout 
the report. Without his sustained and sincere effort, this report would not have 
taken this shape. He encouraged and helped me overcome various difficulties I 
faced at various stages of my report. 
 
I would like to sincerely thank Dr. V. VASUDHA RANI, 
Associate Professor & HOD, Department of Information Technology, for 
providing all the necessary facilities that led to the successful completion of my 
report. 
I then take the privilege to thank our Principal Dr. C.L.V.R.S.V. 
Prasad, who has made the atmosphere so easy to work in. I shall always be 
indebted to them. 
I would like to thank all the faculty members of the Department of 
Information Technology for their direct or indirect support and also all the lab 
technicians for their valuable suggestions and for providing excellent 
opportunities in the completion of this report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Student name: N. Bharat Kumar 
JNTU No 
: 21341A1285 

III | P a g e 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
 
Most of the things in this world have become automated because of technological 
improvements. Face recognition is a popular application in machine learning that aims to 
identify and verify individuals based on their facial features. This paper explores an overview 
of key methodologies in face recognition by using machine learning. It involves extracting key 
facial attributes such as positions of the nose, eyes, mouth, and ear by using different algorithms 
we used to compare and match these features with a database of known faces. This process 
typically includes steps like face detection, feature extraction, and classification. Popular 
techniques used in face recognition include deep learning models like CNNs (Convolutional 
Neural Networks) and algorithms like PCA (Principal Component Analysis) and LDA (Linear 
Discriminant Analysis). Face recognition has various applications like FRS (Face Recognition 
System), and mobile phones and it includes security and personalized user experiences. 
 
 
Keywords: Face recognition, Deep learning, Machine learning, Computer neural networks, 
Principal Component Analysis, and Linear Discriminant Analysis. 

INDEX 
CONTENTS 
PAGE NO 
I. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
I 
II. 
ABSTRACT 
II 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
01 
2. 
LITERATURE SURVEY 
02-04 
2.1 Face Recognition Using Machine Learning 
02 
2.2 Facial Recognition Using Transfer Learning in the Deep CNN 
02 
2.3 A real-time face emotion classification and recognition using a deep learning model 
03 
2.4 Automation of surveillance systems using deep learning and facial recognition 
03 
2.5 Face Detection using Deep Learning: An Improved Faster RCNN Approach 
04 
3. 
METHODOLOGY 
04-10 
3.1 Face Recognition Using Machine Learning 
04 
3.2 Facial Recognition Using Transfer Learning in the Deep CNN 
06 
3.3 A real-time face emotion classification and recognition using a deep learning model 
07 
3.4 Automation of surveillance systems using deep learning and facial recognition 
08 
3.5 Face Detection using Deep Learning: An Improved Faster RCNN Approach 
09 
4. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
10-16 
4.1 Face Recognition Using Machine Learning 
11 
4.2 Facial Recognition Using Transfer Learning in the Deep CNN 
12 
4.3 A real-time face emotion classification and recognition using a deep learning model 
13 
4.4 Automation of surveillance systems using deep learning and facial recognition 
14 
4.5 Face Detection using Deep Learning: An Improved Faster RCNN Approach 
15 
5. 
CONCLUSION 
16 
6. 
REFERENCE 
17 

Term Paper 2023 
Dept of IT, GMRIT 
1 | P a g e 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
Face recognition using machine learning is a technology that uses algorithms to identify 
and verify people's faces. It involves training a model with a large dataset of labelled faces 
and then using that model to recognize and match faces in real-time. Face Recognition is a 
category of biometric software that maps individual facial features and stores the data as a 
face print. Both Machine Learning and Image Processing are the backbones of Face 
Recognition. Convolution Neural Network in Face Recognition is the widely used 
algorithm. CNN is a type of deep-learning neural network consisting of five layers. Input, 
Convolution, Pooling, Fully Connected, and Output layer. The role of the Convolution layer 
is to apply some learnable filters to the original image to extract the feature from a given 
dataset. The pooling layer down samples the image to reduce the computation and the fully 
connected layer makes the final prediction. 
 
In the era of rapid technological evolution, the automation of various facets of daily life has 
become ubiquitous, driven by continuous improvements in machine learning. Among the 
prominent applications, face recognition stands out as a transformative technology aimed 
at identifying and verifying individuals based on their unique facial features. This paper 
presents a comprehensive overview of key methodologies employed in face recognition 
using machine learning techniques. In essence, this paper serves as a comprehensive guide 
to the multifaceted realm of face recognition through machine learning, offering valuable 
insights into the intricacies of algorithmic approaches, their applications, and the evolving 
landscape of this transformative technology. 

Term Paper 2023 
Dept of IT, GMRIT 
2 | P a g e 
 
 
2. LITERATURE SURVEY 
 
The following research papers are studied in detail to understand the proposed 
recommendation technique and experimental result for predicting the output. 
2.1. Pandey, Ishan Ratn, Mayank Raj, Kundan Kumar Sah, Tojo Mathew, and M. S. 
Padmini. "Face Recognition Using Machine Learning." Int. Res. J. Eng. Technol 6 
(2019): 3772-377 
 
 
• This paper proposes a developed CNN model by adding Batch Normalization. 
• To obtain a powerful high accuracy recognition algorithm. 
• Images of 4 people taken at different times with different lighting conditions taken between 
2/03/2019 to 8/03/19. 
• SoftMax Classifier is used to classify the faces in a fully connected layer step. 
• It extracted the features from the trained CNN and feeding them as input to the Fully connected 
layer with softmax activation for classification. 
• Accuracy of Convolutional Neural Networks is 98.4% 
 
2.2 Ikromovich, H. O., & Mamatkulovich, B. B. (2023). FACIAL RECOGNITION USING 
TRANSFER   LEARNING   IN   THE   DEEP   CNN.   Open   Access Repository, 4(3), 
502-507 
 
 
• This approach aims to improve the accuracy of Facial Recognition models using Transfer 
Learning. 
• In this paper Fine-tuning pre-trained CNN models achieved higher accuracy than feature 
extraction with a linear classifier. 
• Labeled Faces in the Wild (LFW) dataset contains over 13,000 face images of 5,749 
individuals. 
• Fine-tuning VGG-16 achieved higher accuracy than fine-tuning ResNet-50. 
• Process of face recognition and classification involves various steps such as preprocessing, 
detection, orientation, extraction of features and classification of emotion. 
 

Term Paper 2023 
Dept of IT, GMRIT 
3 | P a g e 
 
 
 
2.3 Hussain, S. A., & Al Balushi, A. S. A. (2020). A real-time face emotion classification 
and recognition using a deep learning model. In Journal of Physics: Conference Series 
(Vol.1432, No. 1, p. 012087). IOP Publishing. 
 
 
• 
This paper proposes and investigates the Softmax function which is used to obtain and 
classify the image between 0 and 1. 
• 
The Kenya Dryland Education Fund data set is used. 
 
• 
Facial recognition is built with the Convolutional Neural Network model where the 
facial features are extracted and classified as per VGG 16 model. 
• 
The performance measures are validated with the CNN model designed with an 
accuracy of 88%. 
• 
Process of face recognition and classification involves various steps such as preprocessing, 
detection, orientation, extraction of features and classification of emotion. 
 
 
2.4 Singh, A., Bhatt, S., Nayak, V., & Shah, M. (2023). Automation of surveillance 
systems using deep learning and facial recognition. International Journal of System 
Assurance Engineering and Management, 14(Suppl 1), 236-245. 
 
 
• This paper presents a system that can identify and classify individuals in surveillance 
footage. 
• Markov Random Filed is used to train a deep generation model of face pictures. 
 
• HOG (Histogram Orientation Gradient) face detector is used. It is a feature 
descriptor used in computer vision and image processing for object detection 
• 
The VGGFace model has higher accuracy. 
• 
Labelled Faces in the Wild(LFW) data set is used.It contains over 13,000 images from 
hundreds of different celebrities. 
 

Term Paper 2023 
Dept of IT, GMRIT 
4 | P a g e 
 
 
 
2.5 Sun, X., Wu, P., & Hoi, S. C. (2018). Face detection using deep learning: An 
improved faster RCNN approach. Neurocomputing, 299, 42-50 
 
 
• In this paper Convolution Neural Network (CNN) and VGG16 models are used. 
• Histogram Orientation Gradient (HOG), Scale Invariant Feature Transform(SIFT), 
Speed Up Robust Feature(SIFT), and Aggregate Channel Feature(ACF) face detectors 
are used. 
• The author of this paper Proposed Recurrent Neural Network Architecture for Face 
Detection. 
• 
A Wider Face data set is used. 
• The proposed face recognition system is robust against various face presentation attacks, such 
as printed paper, video replay, and silicone masks. 
 
 
3. METHODOLOGY 
 
 
3.1 Face Recognition Using Machine Learning 
 
 
 
 
Fig1: Block Diagram of CNN 

Term Paper 2023 
Dept of IT, GMRIT 
5 | P a g e 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Layers of CNN: 
• The convolution layer performs the core building block of a Convolutionary Network that 
performs most of the heavy-lifting computations. The convolution layer's main purpose is to 
extract features from the image-based input data. By learning image features using small 
squares of input image, Convolution preserves the spatial relationship between pixels. Using 
a set of learnable neurons, the input image is compressed. This creates a feature map in the 
output image and then feeds the feature maps to the next convolution layer as input data. 
• The pooling layer reduces each activation map's dimensionality but still has the most 
important information. The images input are divided into a set of rectangles that are not 
overlapping. A non-linear operation such as average is used to down-sample each region. 
This layer achieves better generalization, faster convergence, robust translation and 
distortion, and is usually placed between layers of convolution. 
• The term Fully Connected Layer (FCL) refers to each filter connected in the next layer in 
the previous layer. The output from the layers of convolution, pooling, and ReLU are 
incarnation of the input image's high-level features. The aim of using the FCL is to use these 
features to classify the input image into different classes based on the training dataset. FCL 
is considered to be the final layer of pooling feeding the features to a classifier using the 
activation function of Softmax. The sum of Fully Connected Layer's output probabilities is 1. 
Using the Softmax as the activation function ensures this. The Softmax function takes an 
arbitrary real-evaluated scores vector and transforms it into a value vector between 0 and 1 
that sums up to 1. 
• ReLU is a non-linear operation that involves units that use the rectifier. It is an element- wise 
operation which means that it is applied per pixel, reconstituting all the negative values by 
zero in the feature map. To understand how ReLU operates, we assume that in the literature 
for neural networks there is a neuron input given as x and from that the rectifier is defined as 
f(x)= max(0,x). 

Term Paper 2023 
Dept of IT, GMRIT 
6 | P a g e 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2 FACIAL RECOGNITION USING TRANSFER LEARNING IN 
THE DEEP CNN 
 
 
Fig: Pre-trained CNN Model for Facial Recognition 
 
 
Example of a pre-trained CNN model used for facial recognition using transfer learning. The 
pre-trained CNN model is first loaded and the fully connected layers are replaced with new ones. 
The model is then fine-tuned using a small dataset of facial images to adapt it to the specific 
facial recognition task. 
Labeled Faces in the Wild (LFW) dataset, which contains over 13,000 face images of 5,749 
individuals. We used a deep CNN architecture that consists of convolutional layers, max- 
pooling layers, and fully connected layers. We compared the performance of our transfer 
learning approach with that of a baseline CNN that was trained from scratch on the same dataset. 
We conduct experiments on two facial recognition datasets: LFW (Labeled Faces in the Wild) 
and CelebA. LFW contains 13,000 images of 5,749 people, and CelebA contains 202,599 
images of 10,177 celebrities. We use VGG-16 and ResNet-50 as pretrained CNN models for 
feature extraction and fine-tuning, respectively. We compare the performance of fine-tuning and 
feature extraction with a linear classifier, and we vary the number of training samples from 50 
to 5,000. 

Term Paper 2023 
Dept of IT, GMRIT 
7 | P a g e 
 
 
 
 
3.3 A real-time face emotion classification 
and recognition using a deep learning 
Model 
 
 
Fig: Face detection and recognition flow chart 
 
 
The Real-time face detection, recognition, and classification is depicted in the figure. The 
captured image is bounded in a box and converted into a binary pattern to specify it as a feature 
vector and stored in a database. The images are trained to match the input image and also classify 
the expression of facial features as sad, angry, happy, disgusted, and neutral. In the training 
process, there are a total of seven steps which are represented below loading the dataset, 
preprocessing, augmenting the data as a feature vector, building and compiling the design model, 
training and storing the feature vector, and validating the test model. 
 
Fig: Block diagram of Face detection and recognition classification 
The proposed system and its functioning are shown in the figure. The individual functional 
blocks have their specific operation. The image is captured using an HP 3000 camera which is 
preprocessed further to feed the neural networks. The captured image is modeled using network 
architecture to build and train the dataset for identification and emotion classification. 

Term Paper 2023 
Dept of IT, GMRIT 
8 | P a g e 
 
 
3.4 Automation of surveillance systems using deep learning and facial recognition 
 
 
 
 
Face detection 
In 2017, OpenCV 3.3 was released, which included a much improved DNN module that works 
with a variety of deep learning frameworks, including Cafe, TensorFlow, and Torch/PyTorch. 
Most crucially, regardless of where it was generated, the module could be imported and utilized 
across any framework. The key contributor to the DNN module, Aleksandr Rybnikov, also 
included a state-of-art face detector based on the Single Shot Detector (SSD) framework with a 
ResNet base network in the official release of OpenCV which can be found in the face_detector 
sub-directory of the DNN samples. With the pre- trained weights, faces could be detected in 
image stills, videos, video streams, and live webcams using the DNN face detector. Moreover, 
due to its lightweight architecture, it performs admirably in terms of operational speed, and CPU 
memory consumption stays comparatively low suitable for real-time detection. The input image 
passed to the face detector is first pre-processed using the DNN library which includes setting 
the image dimensions and normalization. The confidence is retrieved after each pass of the 
input image through the neural network, and weak detection is ruled out if the current 
confidence falls below the set threshold. The collected ROI is then sent through the face 
recognition pipeline for identification. 

Term Paper 2023 
Dept of IT, GMRIT 
9 | P a g e 
 
 
 
Face Recognition 
On the internet, there are a plethora of face recognition techniques to choose from. Choosing 
the right technique for the job, on the other hand, is the most difficult part of the project. We 
began with a deep learning-based local neural network for extracting facial features and 
computing embeddings. After that, the embeddings were used as a training input for the SVM 
classifier. The trained model was stored locally and then deployed for recognition later. 
Although the performance was satisfactory when tested on two individuals, the accuracy 
dropped as the input dataset grew larger. In addition, we experimented with the local DNN by 
adding additional convolutional layers, including max pooling and dropout layers, using various 
optimizers, and altering the DNN’s input image size. We even used a face aligner, and 
OpenCV’s deep learning libraries for image optimization and pre-processing, and converted the 
input images from RGB to grayscale, and YCbCr. Unfortunately, the local DNN was not up 
to the task of real-time recognition, and the model would mistakenly identify two separate 
individuals wearing specs as the same person, and a single individual under various lighting 
circumstances as a different person. 
 
3.5 Face detection using deep learning: An improved faster RCNN approach. 
 
 
Fig: Flowchart of the training procedure of the proposed deep learning scheme 

Term Paper 2023 
Dept of IT, GMRIT 
10 | P a g e 
 
 
 
 
 
Our method follows the similar deep learning framework of Faster RCNN, which is a state-of- 
the-art deep learning scheme for generic object detection [10]. It essentially consists of two 
parts: (1) a Region Proposal Network (RPN) for generating a list of region proposals that likely 
contain objects, or called regions of interest (RoIs); and (2) a Fast RCNN network for classifying 
a region of image into objects (and background) and refining the boundaries of those regions. 
In this work, we propose to extend the Faster RCNN architecture for face detection and train 
our face detection model by following the proposed procedure as shown in Figure. 
 
 
4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS                    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S.No 
                            
                               Paper 
 
Data set 
 
Methods 
 
Results 
1. 
Pandey, Ishan Ratn, Mayank Raj, Kundan Kumar Sah, Tojo Mathew, and M. S. 
Padmini. "Face Recognition Using Machine Learning." Int. Res. J. Eng. Technol 6 
(2019): 3772-377 
Images of 4 
people taken 
between 
2/03/19 to 
8/03/19 
Convolution 
Neural Network 
Accuracy:98.4% 
2. 
Sun, X., Wu, P., & Hoi, S. C. (2018). Face detection using deep learning: An 
improved faster RCNN approach. Neurocomputing, 299, 42-50. 
Wider Face data 
Convolution 
Neural Network 
3. 
Ikromovich , H. O., &  Mamatkulovich , B. B. (2023). FACIAL RECOGNITION 
USING TRANSFER LEARNING IN THE DEEP CNN. Open Access Repository, 
4(3), 502-507. 
Labeled Faces 
in the wild 
Fine-tuning pre-
trained CNN 
models  
Fine-tuning VGG-16 achieved 
higher accuracy than fine-tuning 
ResNet-50. 
4. 
 Hussain, S. A., & Al Balushi, A. S. A. (2020). A real-time face emotion 
classification and recognition using a deep learning model. In Journal of Physics: 
Conference Series (Vol. 1432, No. 1, p. 012087). IOP Publishing. 
Kenya Dryland 
Education Fund  
VGG-16 
Accuracy:88.0% 
5. 
Singh, A., Bhatt, S., Nayak, V., & Shah, M. (2023). Automation of surveillance 
systems using deep learning and facial recognition. International Journal of System 
Assurance Engineering and Management, 14(Suppl 1), 236-245. 
7500 live 
images of over 
26 people, in 
various light 
conditions and 
poses  
VGGFace  
model  
Accuracy:96.0% 
   . 

Term Paper 2023 
Dept of IT, GMRIT 
11 | P a g e 
 
 
4.1 Face Recognition Using Machine Learning. 
 
 
 
 
Our face database contains images of 4 people taken at different times with different lighting 
conditions taken between 2/03/2019 to 8/03/19. Each individual in the database is represented 
by a hundred colored JPEG images with cluttered backgrounds taken at 640 pixels resolution. 
In these images, the average size of the faces is 150bis150 pixels. The pictures show frontal 
and/or inclined faces with different conditions of lighting and scale. 
 
CNNs are a category of neural networks that are highly effective in areas such as face recognition 
and classification. CNNs are a type of feed-forward, multilayered neural network. CNNs consist 
of neurons with learning weights. Each filter takes certain inputs, converts and follows them 
with a non-linearity. 
 
The prominent features of the proposed algorithm is that it uses batch normalization for the 
outputs of the first and final convolution layers and higher accuracy rates are achieved by the 
network. Softmax Classifier is used to classify the faces in a fully connected layer step. Our 
Face Database tested the performance of the proposed algorithm. The results showed 
satisfactory rates of recognition according to literature studies. 

Term Paper 2023 
Dept of IT, GMRIT 
12 | P a g e 
 
 
 
 
4.2 FACIAL RECOGNITION USING TRANSFER LEARNING IN THE DEEP 
CNN 
 
 
Accuracy vs Number of Training Samples 
 
 
Comparison of the accuracy of facial recognition models using different transfer learning 
methods with varying numbers of training samples. Fine-tuning and feature extraction 
achieved high accuracy even with a small number of training samples while training from 
scratch required a larger number of training samples to achieve comparable accuracy. 
 
For fine-tuning, we freeze the first few layers of the pre-trained CNN model and finetune the 
remaining layers on the facial recognition task. We use a learning rate of and train the model 
for 20 epochs with a batch size of 32. For feature extraction, we extract the features from the 
pre-trained CNN model and train a linear classifier on the extracted features. We use logistic 
regression as the linear classifier and train it with a. 

Term Paper 2023 
Dept of IT, GMRIT 
13 | P a g e 
 
 
 
 
4.3 A real-time face emotion classification 
and recognition using deep learning 
Model 
 
 
Fig: Sample KDEF data set (KDEF | The Kenya Dryland Education Fund 2019) 
 
Building a dataset to classify emotion using a convolution neural network layer. 
 
The Kenya Dryland Education Fund data set as in the figure has 4900 pictures whereas 1999 
pictures were removed as they were in side postures and the dataset with 2901 pictures by 
splitting and training the dataset into 70 % and 30% respectively. Similarly to my images, my 
dataset was also created with 100 images. 
 
The captured image is bounded in a box and converted into the binary pattern to specify it as a 
feature vector and stored in a database. The images are trained to match the input image and 
also classify the expression of facial features as sad, angry, happy, disgusted, and neutral. In the 
training process, there are seven steps represented below loading the dataset, preprocessing, 
augmenting the data as a feature vector, building and compiling the design model, training and 
storing the feature vector, and validating the test model. 

Term Paper 2023 
Dept of IT, GMRIT 
14 | P a g e 
 
 
 
 
 
4.4 Automation of surveillance systems using deep learning and facial recognition 
 
 
 
 
 
With our original dataset, we evaluated numerous neural models, including VGG16, a 16- 
layer neural network that won the Imagenet competition in 2014, VGG19, which has 19 layers, 
VGGFace, which is based on VGG16, Inception v3 with 48 layers, and ResNet-50, which has 
50 deep layers. Every model was re-trained by keeping the top layers and adding activation and 
dropout layers as appropriate. As a result of employing pre-trained weights and neural 
architecture, we were successful in improving the accuracy of our face recognition system. 
The facial recognition model received live input from the surveillance camera. The model was 
trained to recognize 26 distinct individuals, and whenever one was identifed, an accuracy 
associated with the recognition was generated as well. Furthermore, we used XAMPP to set up 
a local Apache HTTP server with MySQL as the database management system. If an individual 
was identifed with a precision of over 80%, the name label and a unique timestamp were sent to 
the database. Our algorithm was designed to run for a specifc amount of time, hence, the last 
recorded entry of every unique individual identifed by the system was pulled from the database 
and saved in an excel fle on the local computer before the system was terminated. 

Term Paper 2023 
Dept of IT, GMRIT 
15 | P a g e 
 
 
 
4.5 Face detection using deep learning: An improved faster RCNN approach. 
 
 
Fig:1 
Fig:2 
Fig:3 
 
In addition to the quantitative evaluation results, we also randomly choose some qualitative 
results of face detection examples for different cases, as shown in Fig1, Fig2, and Fig3. For 
example, Fig 1 demonstrates that our model can detect some difficult cases, such as non- frontal 
faces, heavily occluded faces, faces with low resolution, and faces with extreme poses and/or 
illumination. Fig 2 lists some selected false positives, where it seems that most of the false 
positives are missing annotations. Fig 3 lists some of the false negatives, which include some 
very challenging cases, such as blur faces, heavily occluded faces, and extremely small faces. 
 
In this work, we proposed a new method for face detection using deep learning techniques. 
Specifically, we extended the state-of-the-art Faster RCNN framework for generic object 
detection, and proposed several effective strategies for improving the Faster RCNN algorithm 
for resolving face detection tasks, including feature concatenation, multi-scale training, hard 
negative mining, and proper configuration of anchor sizes for RPN, etc. We conducted an 
extensive set of experiments on the well-known FDDB testbed for face detection benchmark, 
and achieved the state-of-the-art results which ranked the best among all the published methods. 
Future work will further address the efficiency and scalability of the proposed method for real-
time face detection. 

Term Paper 2023 
Dept of IT, GMRIT 
16 | P a g e 
 
 
 
 
5. CONCLUSION 
 
 
In conclusion, face recognition using machine learning operates by extracting features from 
facial images through a pre-trained model. These features are transformed into embeddings, 
allowing for efficient comparison with stored identities in a database, The system then decides 
the identity of the input face, providing a powerful tool for various applications. Some 
algorithms used in this paper are a Convolutional Neural Network for feature extraction, a 
Histogram of Orientation and Gradientation for extracting the features from an image, VGG16 
can serve as a feature extractor by using its convolutional layers to extract relevant facial features 
from images, Multi-task Cascaded Neural Network is used to locate and align the facial 
landmarks (such as eyes, nose, and mouth) and. However, the success of the system depends on 
the training data. 

Term Paper 2023 
Dept of IT, GMRIT 
17 | P a g e 
 
 
 
6. REFERENCES 
 
 
1. Pandey, Ishan Ratn, Mayank Raj, Kundan Kumar Sah, Tojo Mathew, and M. S. Padmini. 
"Face Recognition Using Machine Learning." Int. Res. J. Eng. Technol 6 (2019): 3772- 3776. 
2. Ikromovich, H. O., & Mamatkulovich, B. B. (2023). FACIAL RECOGNITION USING 
TRANSFER LEARNING IN THE DEEP CNN. Open Access Repository, 4(3), 502-507 
3. Hussain, S. A., & Al Balushi, A. S. A. (2020). A real-time face emotion classification and 
recognition using a deep learning model. In Journal of Physics: Conference Series (Vol. 
1432, No. 1, p. 012087). IOP Publishing. 
4. Singh, A., Bhatt, S., Nayak, V., & Shah, M. (2023). Automation of surveillance systems using 
deep learning and facial recognition. International Journal of System Assurance Engineering 
and Management, 14(Suppl 1), 236-245. 
5. Sun, X., Wu, P., & Hoi, S. C. (2018). Face detection using deep learning: An improved faster 
RCNN approach. Neurocomputing, 299, 42-50 
6. Zhao, F., Li, J., Zhang, L., Li, Z., & Na, S. G. (2020). Multi-view face recognition using deep 
neural networks. Future Generation Computer Systems, 111, 375-380. 
7. Gwyn, T., Roy, K., & Atay, M. (2021). Face recognition using popular deep net architectures: 
A brief comparative study. Future Internet, 13(7), 164. 
8. Almabdy , S., & Elrefaei , L. (2019). Deep convolutional neural network-based approaches 
for face recognition. Applied Sciences, 9(20), 4397. 
9. Prakash, R. M., Thenmoezhi, N., & Gayathri, M. (2019, November). Face recognition with 
convolutional neural network and transfer learning. In 2019 International Conference on 
Smart Systems and Inventive Technology (ICSSIT) (pp. 861-864). IEEE. 
10. Teoh, K. H., Ismail, R. C., Naziri, S. Z. M., Hussin, R., Isa, M. N. M., & Basir, M. S. S. M. 
(2021, February). Face recognition and identification using deep learning approach. In 
Journal of Physics: Conference Series (Vol. 1755, No. 1, p. 012006). IOP Publishing. 

Term Paper 2023 
Dept of IT, GMRIT 
18 | P a g e 
 
 
11. Talaat, F. M. (2023). Real-time facial emotion recognition system among children with 
autism based on deep learning and IoT. Neural Computing and Applications, 35(17), 
12717-12728. 
12. Xu, S., Xu, S., Wang, Z., Pu, C., & Meng, Q. (2020, May). Face Recognition algorithm 
based on convolutional neural network. In Journal of Physics: Conference Series (Vol. 
1550, No. 2, p. 022023). IOP Publishing. 
13. Lou, G., & Shi, H. (2020). Face image recognition based on convolutional neural network. 
China Communications, 17(2), 117-124. 

